The Project Gutenberg eBook of Prince Ragnal and other holiday
verses, by Eleanor C. Donnelly

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Prince Ragnal and other holiday verses

Author: Eleanor C. Donnelly

Release Date: November 18, 2022 [eBook #69379]

Language: English

Produced by: Krista Zaleski, Tim Lindell and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRINCE RAGNAL AND OTHER
HOLIDAY VERSES ***



[Illustration:

  _Here is the well-spring of those sparkling, saving waters--
  Here, in the heart of Mary’s Blessed Boy!_

  (_See page 33._)
]




  Prince Ragnal

  AND OTHER HOLIDAY VERSES

  BY

  ELEANOR C. DONNELLY

  [Illustration]

  PHILADELPHIA

  H. L. Kilner & Co.

  PUBLISHERS




Copyright, 1898, by Eleanor C. Donnelly.




  TO

  MY REVERED FRIEND OF MANY YEARS,

  Rev. Matthew Russell, S. J.,

  Editor of the “Irish Monthly,” Dublin, Ireland,

  THIS LITTLE BOOK IS DEDICATED

  BY HIS SPECIAL PERMISSION.




FINDING LIST


[Illustration]

                                      PAGE

  PRINCE RAGNAL                          9

  CHRISTMAS CAROL                       22

  AT DAME NOËL’S                        26

  A MURILLO                             29

  THE STABLE OF BETHLEHEM               31

  THE THREE MASSES ON CHRISTMAS DAY     34

  THE GOD-MAN                           37

  BETHLEHEM’S QUEEN                     38




Prince Ragnal.

[Illustration]

A Christmas Legend of Early Christian Ireland.

[Illustration]


THE EVE.

  White and chill from the wintry skies,
    The starlight falls upon ancient Eire:
  The wind makes moan thro’ the leafless trees
    Of Devenish Isle, like a soul in fear,--
  Deep in the heart of its snowy woods,
    Fanning a peat-flame, lone and drear.

[Illustration]

  The ruined hut where that turf-fire glows
    Hath never a roof of thatch or stone,
  But bow and spear on the rude walls hang,
    And a bed of skins on the floor is strewn,
  Where, close to the embers, stern and still,
    Ragnal the leper sits alone.

[Illustration]

  Ragnal of Errigal, prince of doom,
    His face, a death-mask of despair;--
  The foul disorder’s loathly scales
    Lacquer his skin with their hideous glair:
  Dulling the blue of his brave young eye,
    Dimming the gold of his tangled hair.

[Illustration]

  Bowed like a churl of three-score ten,
    His peakéd chin in his wasted hands,
  He watches the flames with a sluggish eye,
    Sparkle and glow in their fiery dance;
  Till, deep in the embers, pictured, lie
    His life’s lost hopes--its dead romance.

[Illustration]

  A royal castle beside the sea,
    On breezy cliffs, exultant, set:
  A Prince and Princess, young and fair,
    Pacing the grassy parapet,
  The golden fringe of his long, bright hair
    Sweeping the maiden’s locks of jet.

[Illustration]

  Thro’ perfum’d air, replete with peace,
    The swallows skim the blue waves’ flow:
  The lovely Dympna’s hand, at rest
    On her lover’s arm (a thing of snow)--
  Thrills, as he bends his head, and breathes
    In her blushing ear, a whisper low.

[Illustration]

  She gathers the fleece of her floating veil
    From the nodding shade of his raven plume,
  As, gravely pleading, he bends again
    To hear those bright lips speak his doom.
  --Why does she start and lift her head?
    Why are her cheeks devoid of bloom?

[Illustration]

  He sees the flash of her wide, dark eye,
    He hears her clear voice rise and fall:
  “Sooner than sell my faith in Christ,
    My life I’d yield--my love--my all!
  Content my bridal vows should prove
    A martyr’s grave and a virgin’s pall!”

[Illustration]

  Then, in the flames, his other self
    He sees, erect in scorn and pride:
  “Sooner would I a leper be,
    Far from the world to crouch and hide,
  Than bend to a Christian priest mine knee,
    Or take to mine arms a Christian bride!”

[Illustration]

  The royal blood leaps in her face,
    Her voice rings out its golden knell:
  “O Christ! incline Thy pitying grace,
    And pardon this poor infidel!”
  Then, with averted, shuddering gaze,
    “Unhappy Ragnal! fare thee well!”

[Illustration]

  A sudden darkness shuts her in ...
    The flutter of her snowy gown--
  The sunlit towers--the sparkling waves
    In pallid embers, crumble down;
  As Ragnal by the fire sits,
    A leprous Prince without a crown!

[Illustration]

  “O lily, nurtured by the sea!
    Sweet Dympna, long-lost, promised bride!
  Thine unknown Christ”--(he cries aloud):
    “This night hath triumph’d o’er my pride!
  Forgive me!”--Lo! a gust of song
    Fills all the wintry world outside!

[Illustration]




THE DAWN.


  A thrilling, heavenly harmony
    From silvern harps and lutes divine:
  The Leper, prostrate on his face,
    Drinks in the glorious draught like wine;
  Then, rising, reels like drunken wight,
    Into the starlight’s wondrous shine.

[Illustration]

  For strange, unearthly lustres fill
    The frosty air. To Ragnal blown,
  Across Lough Erne, there comes the breath
    Of sweetest blossoms ever grown;
  Yet, right or left, above, below,
    No living thing or shape is shown.

[Illustration]

  All wordless, o’er the sparkling Lough,
    The music steals again--but hark!
  “_Gloria in excelsis!_” sings
    A voice, up-soaring like a lark;
  While: “_Et in terra pax!_” (strange words!)
    Drop down to Ragnal thro’ the dark.

[Illustration]

  His breast heaves with a mighty fear,
    The strong man trembles like a reed:
  The while the minstrels float before,
    (Tho’ ulcer’d feet and ankles bleed),
  Straight onward through the shining wood,
    He needs must follow where they lead;

[Illustration]

  And walks, and walks, and walks, and walks,
    His bare feet buried in the snow;
  While flaming eyes of savage beasts
    From bog and thicket, glare and glow.
  He sees the stars slide down the east,
    He hears the cocks begin to crow.

[Illustration]

  Yet walks, and walks, and walks, and walks,
    Till ev’ry nerve and sinew aches,
  And sweat and blood and loathly scales
    Mark ev’ry painful step he takes--
  When, suddenly, the rapturous sound
    That lured him on--his path forsakes!

[Illustration]

  And with his burning forehead bared,
    The hoar-frost on his yellow locks,
  The Leper finds himself before
    An open cave, wherein an ox
  And ass are stalled--dumb, placid brutes,--
    Their manger rooted in the rocks.

[Illustration]

  And in the midst--O Vision strange!--
    A Woman glorious as the moon,
  Upon whose breast, a radiant Child
    Lies, like a rosebud blown in June,
  His eyes (twin-lamps of Paradise!)
    Making the night a brilliant noon.

[Illustration]

  They look on Ragnal sweet, yet sad,
    And Ragnal bends his aching knee;
  He stretches forth his wasted arms,
    And cries: “Eternal praise to Thee!
  O Blessed Christ! Thine hour is come--
    Complete the work begun in me!”

[Illustration]

  And then, he swoons--how long--how short
    A space, he knows not--till his eyes
  He, languid, opens to the dawn,
    Faint-blushing in the eastern skies;
  And sees the cavern full of shapes,
    And blazing with a glad surprise!

[Illustration:

  _And in the midst--O Vision strange!--
    A Woman glorious as the moon,
  Upon whose breast, a radiant Child
    Lies, like a rosebud blown in June._

  (_See page 16._)
]

[Illustration]

  An altar cloth’d with pure samite,
    Adorned with gold and precious stones--
  A Christian priest in vestments white
    Baptizing many little ones;
  And all the people on their knees
    Singing in full, melodious tones!--

[Illustration]

  Whose hand on Ragnal’s shoulder lies?
    Whose sweet voice murmurs in his ear?
  “For such as _thou_, the Christ was born;
    Arise, Prince Ragnal, and draw near!”
  A veiléd woman leads him down
    To where the altar-lights shine clear.

[Illustration]

  The Hidden Presence strong and sweet
    His erring son would closer draw.
  In the warm glory of the shrine,
    His icy blood begins to thaw:
  Yet Ragnal dare not lift his eyes--
    He trembles with delicious awe.

[Illustration]

  What time the children yield him place,
    (Without a look or sign of dread),
  Kneeling before the agéd priest,
    The sacred words are softly said;
  And with a thrill of joy, he feels
    The saving waters on his head.

[Illustration]

  O miracle of purest faith!
    The people shout and clap their hands--
  Like some foul mantle, earthward, cast,
    Down drop the Leper’s loathsome bands!--
  Ragnal, the Golden-hair’d, once more,
    In manly beauty, perfect, stands!

[Illustration]

  While, clear and strong to Heaven’s high court,
    Goes up the glorious Christmas hymn--
  The shrouded woman at his side
    Flings back her veil from eyes that swim
  With happy tears--and Dympna’s face
    Shines star-like, from the shadows dim!

[Illustration]

  Forgiven the past--forgot the pains
    Which made _that_ face his bitterest dream;
  A trusting smile is on its lips,
    Its eyes with glad affection beam,
  While, down the Prince’s waving beard,
    The grateful tears, unbidden, stream.

[Illustration]

  The priest hath joined their willing hands;
    The day grows bright--the wind blows free--
  As thro’ the woods, they go to seek
    Their sunlit castle by the sea.
  O Ragnal of the Golden Hair!
    The Lord hath gracious dealt with thee!




Christmas Carol.


I.

  O holy Night! O starry Night,
    That ushers in Salvation’s morn!
  O blessed Eve of rare delight,
    Whereon the Christ was born!
  Thine angels flood the hills with song,
    And rouse the shepherds from their sleep;
  While past’ral pipes the lay prolong,
  Around the Stable door, they throng
    With votive lambs and sheep.

            Sing _Gloria_, sing _Gloria_
            _In excelsis Deo!_


II.

  O solemn Night! O lustrous Night,
    That fills the earth with brightest Day!
  The Wise Men come in robes of white
    From kingdoms far away.

[Illustration:

  _This Babe--the Virgin’s sinless Boy--
  Shall sin and hell and death destroy,
    And heaven’s portals ope!_

  (_See page 25._)
]


  What time their weary journey ends,
    They haste to worship Judah’s King;
  In jewel’d zones and bazubends
  Behold the three Chaldean friends,
    Gold, myrrh, and incense bring!

            Sing _Gloria_, sing _Gloria_
            _In excelsis Deo!_


III.

  O radiant Night! O Night of nights!
    Thy bells ring sweet from Paradise;
  Thine orient Star, eternal, lights
    The Crib where Jesus lies!
  Wealth of the poor, the mourner’s joy,
    The sinner’s shield, the captive’s hope,
  This Babe--the Virgin’s sinless Boy--
  Shall sin and hell and death destroy,
    And heaven’s portals ope!

            Sing _Gloria_, sing _Gloria_
            _In excelsis Deo!_




At Dame Noël’s.

AN OLD-WORLD TRADITION.


  The clock strikes Twelve! ’Tis Christmas Eve
    At old Dame Noël’s farm;
  Beyond the house, with holly wreathed,
  The barn in mistletoe is sheathed.
    (God save us from all harm!)

[Illustration]

  The red cock to the manger springs,
    And shrills its Christmas prayer;
  Three times, it flaps its shining wings,
  Then, “_Christus--natus--est!_”--it sings.
    --The ox roars “_Ubi?_--Where?”

[Illustration]

  But, soft thro’ swaths of sun-dried grass,
    It hears the lamb below,
  From out the shimmering, scented mass,
  Bleat: “_Beth’lem! Beth’lem!_”--Brays the ass:
    “_Eamus!_--Let us go!”

[Illustration]

  And ’round about the hive (whose zone
    Shall summer sweets embalm),
  The bees go floating as they drone,
  Go floating, as they thus intone
    Their honeyed, midnight psalm:

[Illustration]

  “_Let all Creation praise the Lord,
    Who comes to men this Christmas morn:
  The Son of God, th’ Incarnate Word,
    In Bethlehem of Mary born!_

[Illustration]

  “_Good ox, good ass, your brothers wait
    This hour beside His Crib--A sign
  There, too, is thine, meek lamb; thy Mate
    Is Blessed Mary’s Lamb divine!_

[Illustration]

  “_And, from thy seed, bold Chanticleer!
    Shall spring that bird of Passiontide,
  Whose voice shall thrice to Peter’s ear
    Proclaim: ‘Thou hast thy Lord denied!’_

[Illustration]

  “_Ah! tho’ we little bees may ne’er
    Find in the Holy Babe, our part;
  Nor, with our sweetest honey, dare
    To heal His tender, bleeding heart;_

[Illustration]

  “_Tho’ none of us may share Man’s grace,
    Nor claim his Saviour newly-born,
  Yet do we still His mercies praise,
    And bless His birth, this Christmas morn!_”

         *       *       *       *       *

  Thus do the bonny creatures strive
    To hail Love’s mystery;
  In comely shapes, alert, alive,
  Thus do they greet, in stall and hive,
    Our Lord’s Nativity!

[Illustration]

  Thus, do the Soulless keep the feast
    At old Dame Noël’s farm;
  The Christmas star shines in the east,
  Soft chimes the bell--swift glides the priest--
    God save us from all harm!




A Murillo.


  The lovely Christ-Child, like a lily, lies
    Within His Maiden Mother’s pure embrace--
  The azure depths of her adoring eyes,
    The faithful mirrors of His glorious face!

[Illustration]

  The while upon her bosom, warm and white,
    She shelters Him, with love and tender awe,
  From the bleak darkness of the winter night,
    From the rough manger and the bristling straw,

[Illustration]

  The shepherds at the dazzling Vision stare;
    The gentle beasts, at Joseph’s touch, bow down;
  And angel choirs in vibrant tones declare
    That Christ is born a babe in David’s town!

[Illustration]

  O Babyhood, the harbinger of hope
    To every babe enthroned on woman’s breast!
  O Motherhood, within whose gracious scope
    All lesser motherhood is shrined and blessed!

[Illustration]

  No sceptred Cæsar can dispute _your_ sway--
    Angels or men your golden mission claim--
  For yours is Christ--to-day and yesterday,
    And thro’ the eternal ages, still the same!

[Illustration]




The Stable of Bethlehem.


  There is no ante-chamber in this royal palace,
    There are no waiting-rooms of haughty state:
  No chamberlain austere, no courtiers puff’d with malice,
    To shut us out from where the King doth wait--
  The new-born King, unscepter’d and uncrown’d,
  In swaddling-bands of lowly linen bound.

[Illustration]

  Open and wide to all, are these old palace-portals--
    The very beasts have found their way therein.
  Amid the thronging Angels, would ye seek for mortals?
    Behold the Virgin without stain of sin,
  And Joseph, her chaste spouse!--Thrice blesséd pair!
  They kneel before the Babe in wordless prayer!

[Illustration]

  The sweetest, fairest Babe e’er seen! Thro’ ruined rafters,
    The happy stars shine in upon His stall;
  The keen wind, blowing from the fields and mountain-pastures,
    Deepens the rose-tint of His visage small,
  And bids His hands, on Mary’s bosom, glow
  Like soft, pink blossoms on a drift of snow.

[Illustration]

  Kneel and adore Him! Bring your hearts, as stainless lilies,
    To cast before His darling, dimpled feet!
  Soon shall the shepherds from the dusky hills and valleys,
    In simple faith, around His manger meet;
  And stately Kings, on wondrous quest intent,
  Shall bring their gifts from out the Orient.

[Illustration]


  O Love, so free, so royal, yet so condescending--
    So unpretentious in Thy majesty!
  As Thy beginning, even so shall be Thine ending
    Upon the open heights of Calvary!
  A fountain, free to all beneath God’s heaven,
  Wherein all sinners may be cleansed and shriven!

[Illustration]

  Here is the well-spring of those sparkling, saving waters--
    Here, in the heart of Mary’s Blessed Boy!
  From out the Saviour’s fountains, O earth’s sons and daughters,
    Ye shall draw graces with exceeding joy;
  And, with the Christmas Angels, rapturous, sing:
  Glory and homage to the new-born King!




The Three Masses on Christmas Day.


I.

    “_The Lord hath said to me: Thou art my Son, this day have I
    begotten thee._”--Ps. ii, 7.

  Deep in the bosom of the Father lies
    His co-eternal Word--the Infinite,
    Whose generation’s everlasting light
  Illumes the unborn ages.... Lift your eyes,
  And contemplate that Home in Paradise,
    That first eternal Dwelling of the Word!--
  Before the angels were,--before the skies
    Blush’d over Eden, or the waters stirred
  Under the Spirit’s strong, creative breath,--
    Uttered the Father in His bosom blest
  This glorious Word.... What matter change or death?
    Amid the Godhead’s central fires expressed,
  Life lives in Love.--O men of vision dim,
  Here, at His altars, kneel, and worship Him!


II.

    “_And they came with haste, and they found Mary and Joseph,
    and the Infant lying in a manger._”--Luke ii, 16.

  Tho’ midnight shadows wrap Him in their pall,
    The stars upon His rosy sweetness shine;
  From Mary’s bosom to the cattle-stall,
    He passes in His baby grace divine!
    _Venite adoremus._ In this shrine,
  Our God appears, our Saviour, and our All!
  Before the Word made Flesh, adoring, fall,
    And praise the Everlasting’s blest design.
  Far, o’er the hills, the angel-chorus rings;
    The Shepherds, thro’ the dusk, are drawing nigh;
  St. Joseph’s lantern glows.... The Eastern Kings
    Stand out, like giants, ’gainst the bright’ning sky.
  “_Glory to God!_”--(the swelling strains increase)
  “_And, on the earth, to men of good-will--peace!_”


III.

    “_A child is born to us, and a Son is given to us, and the
    government is upon his shoulders; and his name shall be called
    the Angel of great Council._”--Isaias ix.

  Within the Bethlehem of these poor hearts,
    The manger of our souls, O Prince of men!
    Come, in Thy pity, and be born again!--
  Ere yet the golden Christmas-tide departs,
  Love, with its thousand sweet and tender arts,
    Shall emulate the Shepherds’ glowing zeal,
  Or, like the Magi from the Orient marts,
    Shall gold, and myrrh, and frankincense reveal.

  O Babe, so rich in Thy great poverty,
    Give us Detachment’s grand, divorcing grace!
  O Babe, sublime in Thy humility,
    Grant us, in Thee, all pride to self-abase!
  O suff’ring Babe, so blissful in Thy woe,
  A self-denying joy, on us, bestow!




The God-Man.


  “Would I might be as God!” the first man cried,
  When, with forbidden fruits, Sin’s reign began.--
    Lo! to repair the ruin wrought by Pride,
  Christ, in the manger, we behold as Man!




Bethlehem’s Queen.


    “_And going into the house, they found the Child with Mary,
    his Mother._”--Matt. iii, 11.

  O what would this life be without our sweet Mother?
    --A desert divested of well-springs and trees,
  A land without music, light, fragrance, or flowers,
    A black, sultry night, without moonlight or breeze!

[Illustration]

  No solace for souls in their struggles with Satan,
    No hope for the sinner engulf’d in despair,
  No light for the saint in his doubts and temptations,
    No stronghold of peace in a world full of care;

[Illustration]

  Dear _Cause of our joy!_ bearing Bliss in thy bosom,
    Clear _Mirror of justice!_ resplendent with light,
  Rare _Mystical Rose!_ in thy glory a-blossom,
    Fair _Star of the morning!_ dispelling our night,--

[Illustration]

  Tho’ all the foul fiends of the regions infernal
    Assail the sad spirit with clamorous din;
  Tho’ earth and the earthy obscure the Eternal,
    And Life’s brightest promise be blighted by sin,--

[Illustration]

  What bliss but to feel the cool print of thy sandal
    On fiery promptings and passions aglow;
  To nestle, like birds, ’neath thy sky-color’d mantle,
    And calm our hot hearts on thy bosom of snow!

[Illustration]

  What bliss thro’ the darkness, the heat, and the clamor,
    To fly to thy feet, to thy virginal shrine,--
  And there, in thy presence, releas’d from Sin’s glamor,
    Drink in deepest draughts of thy spirit divine!

[Illustration]

  O drear would our life be without this fair Flower,
    This Lily of Israel, blooming alone!
  Sweet Christ! how we bless Thee for Bethlehem’s dower,
    Which made Thy pure Mother forever our own!




Transcriber’s Notes

Italics are represented thus _italic_.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRINCE RAGNAL AND OTHER HOLIDAY
VERSES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
